the UN Security Council has passed a
resolution demanding an immediate
ceasefire in Gaza for the first time the
Breakthrough comes after the United
States abstained from the vote after
vetoing previous efforts over the last
five months the resolution also demanded
the immediate release of all hostages
still being held by Hamas the group that
committed the October 7 Terror attacks
against
Israel the draft resolution has been
adopted as
resolution a milestone moment at the
United Nations security Council 14
Nations voted in favor of the resolution
calling for a ceasefire in Gaza for the
first
time the United States refrained from
vetoing the agreement instead
abstaining directly opposing a request
from Israel not to do
so this resolution tion rightly
acknowledges that during the month of
Ramadan we must recommit to peace Hamas
can do that by accepting the deal on the
table a ceasefire can begin immediately
with the release of the first hostage
and so we must put pressure on Hamas to
do just
that Israel's planned invasion of Rafa
is causing major concerns for the US its
biggest Ally an Israeli delegation was
du to travel to Washington this week to
discuss
Alternatives but Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu called off the trip
after the security council's decision
and Israel's defense minister yuav
Galant already in the US shows no signs
of acknowledging the ceasefire
call we have no moral right to stop the
war in Gaza until we return all the
hostages home if we do not reach a clear
and decisive decision in G it may bring
us closer to war in the
North in Gaza the security Council vote
brought some hope to
many this marks a crucial step towards
halting Israel's actions the US must
leverage all of its resources as it's
both the primary and ultimate advocate
for
Israel while the ceasefire vote brought
hope in Gaza without Israel's support it
may end up being a symbolic gesture
rather than a practical solution for
peace now Rosa fredman is Professor of
law conflict and Global development at
the University of reading in the UK her
research focuses on the UN especially
questions related to Human Rights and I
asked her if she was surprised that
today's ceasefire resolution
passed I think most of us were surprised
that the resolution was tabled in the
first place the United States had tabled
a resolution on Friday which did not
pass and was vetoed by Russia and by
China and very swiftly the 10 members of
the security Council who don't hold a
veto who are not permanent members who
are elected for 2-year terms table this
resolution one of the shortest
resolutions in the security council's
history which had three key messages and
the surprise was not that it passed but
that it was tabled so swiftly in the
first place and why do you think the US
didn't vote it down this
time the three key messages are ones
that have Global recognition there maybe
a few states that don't agree with one
or two of them but globally there is
consensus that there needs to be a
ceasefire not a permanent one but for a
short period of time a CE far during the
month the holy month of Ramadan there is
global consensus that these hostages who
have been held in captivity for nearly
170 days should be released including
the babies and also the elderly and the
sick and there is global consensus that
the people in Gaza in this humanitarian
catastrophe must receive Aid
specifically food Aid to stop a famine
so this this resolution had to pass
because there wasn't a single country in
the UN Security Council who could say
that they didn't agree with those three
key messages okay so now it has passed
um I understand that this is legally
binding but can Israel simply ignore
this
decision well it's legally binding and a
lot of what the UN does is legally
binding but the security Council has
these added extra enforcement Powers so
it can send um sanctions embargos no fly
zones to implement its its resolutions
the decisions that it makes any country
can of course ignore what the UN says
but it would ignore it at its Peril both
its Peril in terms of having those
implementing enforcement Powers against
it but also the Diplomatic um the trade
the all of the other bilateral in
between states that will sort of that
will occur so countries might turn
around and boycott uh a country that
that ignores the UN Security Council
resolution we saw this in terms of Iraq
we saw this in terms of Yugoslavia
Rwanda um so if Israel does ignore this
this resolution it will do so to its
detriment the problem is that
Israel's uh adversary in this is a
terrorist group and the terrorist group
will ignore anything that's tabled at
the United Nations because it's not a
sovereign state and because it doesn't
care what the global Community says so
long as it continues to be funded by
Iran or by other countries that support
its aims so what the United States said
after the vote was really crucial it
said that all countries at the security
Council must use their power to put
pressure on Hamas to actually abide by
the terms of this resolution and
specifically to hold to the ceasefire
and specifically to release a hostages
Dead or Alive of whatever age and of
whatever ability okay so Israel has
indicated that it will carry on
regardless but it it it as you say it
has cover in this in as much
as as a state we can say yes you must do
this but Israel can around and say well
what about them what about Hamas are you
going to punish them if you punish
us well the ceasefire will hold for as
long as both parties adhere to it so the
minute that one party breaks it the
other party will will point and say well
they broke it they fired a rocket into
Israel or They carried on incursions
into Rafa and they will use that as an
excuse more importantly perhaps is that
the United States and others of Israel's
allies hold the key to the Iron Dome the
Iron Dome prevents Rockets from falling
down and killing many if not most of
Israelis and those Rockets aren't only
coming from Gaza they're also coming
from Lebanon from Hezbollah which is
another terrorist organization which is
funded by Iran if Israel doesn't abide
to the terms of this resolution and if
its allies then don't continue to fund
the Iron Dome then this could be a very
significant moment for the the
continuation of the state of Israel
thank you for walking us through that so
clearly professor professor Rosa
freedoman from the University of reading
in the
UK thank you well let's bring in Aaron
David Miller who's a Middle East analyst
and Senior fellow at the carnegi
Endowment for International Peace he
previously worked at the US state
department for 24 years serving six
secretaries of State as an adviser on
the Middle East welcome to DW will this
ceasefire resolution prevent Israel from
from continuing its plans to go into
Gaza look this resolution uh is
certainly not shameful as the Israeli
rep described it but it's also not very
effective it's going to change nothing
on the
ground and the reality is today was not
a in my judgment was not a good day
either for the United States or
Israel we had a un Security Council
resolution that essentially cannot
affect and Advance what the president
really wants which is to fundamentally
see a deescalation in Gaza a cessation
in Israel's mil military activities
freeing the hostages ins surging
humanitarian
assistance that's so desperately needed
by 2.3 million Gaza who were essentially
besieged this resolution will will
accomplish none of that and Israel's
response to this
resolution which was to politic uh the
Prime Minister has already begun his
re-election campaign uh to criticize the
United States and refuse to send a
delegation to discuss whether there are
alternatives to a ground campaign in
Rafa that was also fundamentally
counterproductive neither what the US
did today or what Israel did today is
going to alter one
iota of the conflict that we're watching
and has been ongoing for six months the
only thing that will do that is an
Israeli Hamas negotiation which produces
a six- week pause which might might
create the time and space to
fundamentally change and alter the
Dynamics in Gaza but today won't do it
either what US the US did or what Israel
did so it's so as from what from the
analysis that you've just given us here
you seem to be saying that that that the
UN is really irrelevant to what's going
on on the
ground the UN can do a lot it has
agencies and expertise with respect to
humanitarian assistance and and in
Middle East it's demonstrated a pension
for for peacekeeping and another other
conflict areas but in terms of a
ceasefire you think it has
cannot it cannot alter the behavior of
the two major
combatants to this conflict and the
reason we have it's going on for six
months is because no outside
power is willing and or able to
fundamentally change the battlefield
dynamic between what Israel wants and
what Hamas seeks to achieve that should
be apparent to
everyone right
so do you think then so so given
everything that that you said it it's
and and you talked about uh uh um
Benjamin Netanyahu essentially
politicking now on on
reelection everyone the the Israelis get
stuck in their um as Silo the US doesn't
change its position until and unless
there the that um President Biden is
removed those two Dynamics don't change
this this sounds like unless something
major happens perhaps
militarily everybody stays where they
are I think frankly the only party or
parties plural that seemed to be in a
hurry to end the conflict between Israel
and Hamas certainly not Israel and it's
certainly not Hamas the parties that are
displaying the greatest sense of urgency
and it's politically inconvenient to
recognize are the parties that are
external to these conflicts I've been
around Middle East negotiations for a
very long time they tend to have two
speeds slow and slower and in order for
them to succeed each side needs to have
urgency and an achievable goal that will
somehow fundamentally address their
concerns I see no way right
now uh to do any better than a six-week
pause Hamas wants to survive they'll
keep 50 hostages even if 45 are released
the Israelis are determined to
obliterate Hamas as a military
organization and to kill its senior
leadership I don't think either side has
abandoned those goals and in view of
that whether it's Germany or the UN or
the us nobody is willing
Andor
able um to fundamentally alter the the
uh calculations of the two combatants
that's why this conflict's gone on for
six months that that's clear help us
understand um Washington's thinking what
was it about this resolution that made
them not use the veto which they have
used three times against similar
resolutions it's a very good question I
think on one hand uh there is a certain
exhaustion of having
to uh somehow fundamentally try to alter
or veto for un Security Council
resolutions I think the United States
wanted to send a signal it sent a signal
there's no question about it that is
very
unhappy that it may even be angry at uh
at the current government of Israel and
some of its policies uh I think
political pressure is building
mainstream Democrats the so called
uncommitted in a very close election
which could be determined by three or
four states under 100,000 votes in
November the
uncommitted um those who for any number
of reasons including the
administration's policy on Gaza may
choose simply not to vote so I think all
of these things
combin but the ultimate objective is
having the opposite effect that's the
problem it's not advancing what Joe
Biden wants and the only thing that can
deliver that which is to literally
change the pictures in Gaza break the
battlefield Dynamic create predictable
corridors to Surge humanitarian
assistance and maybe just maybe after a
six week pause try to extend that
somehow the only thing that's going to
do that uh is is what's happening in
Doha nothing in New York or at the UN
can bring that about okay that's a a f
fascinating very interesting and rather
Bleak analysis but we thank you for it
Aaron David Miller at the carnegi
Endowment for International Peace thank
you so much thank you for having
me